[skip changelog] document the docs generation workflow (#738)
arduino/arduino-cli: docs/CONTRIBUTING.md

Before we can accept your contributions you have to sign the [Contributor License Agreement][0]

> ## Pull Requests

Author: Unrelated to this PR, but I thought this paragraph should be upper in the page as it's more human-related than technical.

## Working on docs

Documentation is provided to final users in form of static HTML content generated
from a tool called [MkDocs][9] and hosted on [GitHub Pages][7].

### Local development

Most of the documentation consists of static content written over several
Markdown files under the `docs` folder at the root of this git repository but
some  other content is dynamically generated from the CI pipelines - this is the

> case of the command line reference and the gRPC interface, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
case with the command line reference and the gRPC interface, for example.
```

> If you want to check out how the documentation would look like after some local

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to check out how the documentation would look after some local
```

the git repository (if you have a Python virtual environment, activate it before
proceeding):

* go get -u github.com/pseudomuto/protoc-gen-doc/cmd/protoc-gen-doc
* pip install -r requirements_docs.txt

When working on docs, you can launch a command that will take care of
generating the docs, build the static website and start a local server you can
later access with a web browser to see a preview of your changes. From the root
of the git repository run:

```shell
task docs:serve
```

If you don't see any error, hit http://127.0.0.1:8000 with your browser to
navigate the generated docs.

### Docs publishing

The present git repository has a special branch called `gh-pages` that contains
the generated HTML code for the docs website; every time a change is pushed to
this special branch, GitHub automatically triggers a [deployment][8] to pull the
change and publish a new version of the website. Do not open Pull Requests to
push changes to the `gh-pages` branch, that will be done exclusively from the
CI.

### Docs versioning

In order to provide support for multiple Arduino CLI releases, Documentation is
versioned so that visitors can select which version of the documentation website

> should be displayed. Unfortunately this feature isn't provided by neither GitHub
> pages nor MkDocs, so we had to implement it on top of the generation process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should be displayed. Unfortunately this feature isn't provided by GitHub pages
or MkDocs, so we had to implement it on top of the generation process.
```
Double negative.

Before delving into the details of the generation process, here follow some
requirements that were established to provide versioned documentation:

* A special version of the documentation called `dev` is provided to reflect the
  status of the Arduino CLI on the `master` branch - this includes unreleased
  features and bugfixes.
* Docs are versioned after the minor version of an Arduino CLI release. For
  example, Arduino CLI `0.99.1` and `0.99.2` will be both covered by
  documentation version `0.99`.
* The landing page of the documentation website will automatically redirect
  visitors to the most recently released version of the Arduino CLI.

To implement the requirements above, the execution of MkDocs is wrapped using a

> CLI tool called [Mike][10] that does few things for us:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CLI tool called [Mike][10] that does a few things for us:
```

* It runs MkDocs targeting subfolders named after the Arduino CLI version, e.g.
  documentation for version `0.10.1` can be found under the folder `0.10`.

> * It injects an HTML control into the documentation website that let visitors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It injects an HTML control into the documentation website that lets visitors
```

  choose which version of the docs to browse from a dropdown list.
* It provides a redirect to a version we decide when visitors hit the landing
  page of the documentation website.
* It pushes generated contents to the `gh-pages` branch.

> **Note:** unless you're working on the generation process itself, you should
> never run Mike from a local environment, either directly or through the Task
> `docs:publish`. This might result in unwanted changes to the public website.

### Docs automation

In order to avoid unwanted changes to the public website hosting the Arduino
CLI documentation, only Mike is allowed to push changes to the `gh-pages` branch,

> and this only heppens from within the CI, in a workflow named [docs][11].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and this only happens from within the CI, in a workflow named [docs][11].
```

The CI is responsible for guessing which version of the Arduino CLI we're
building docs for, so that generated contents will be stored in the appropriate

> section of the documentation website. This guessing might be fairly complex,
> reason why the logic is implemented in a Python script called [`build.py`][12].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
section of the documentation website. Because this guessing might be fairly
complex, the logic is implemented in a Python script called [`build.py`][12].
```

The script will determine the version of the Arduino CLI that was modified in

> the current commit (either `dev` or an official, numbered release) and wether

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the current commit (either `dev` or an official, numbered release) and whether
```
